# Question 2

The first RNA deconvolution is the blind deconvolution, that is the fully unsupervised approach, in which the inference of the proportion (W) and the gene expression matrix (S) comes directly from matrix of bulk expression profiles (X), using methods such as Non-negarive Matrix Factorization (NMF) or Independent Component Analysis (ICA). The second one is the guided deconvolution, that has a supervised approach in which there are information about the gene expression matrix within each subtype (S). Models that follow this second approach are for example CIBERSORT, EPIC and MuSiC.
The advantage of the blind deconvolution is that we don't need the single-cell data, hence the model is less expensive in terms of data from laboratory. Also, this approach is not constrained by reference bias, since estimates are driven purely by variation in the bulk data, which can better capture context-specific biology.
One disadvantage for the blind deconvolution is its lower biological interpretability, as inferred components cannot directly correspond to cell types, and mapping them is not always straightforward. Another downside is the usually lower accuracy for known cell-type quantification, since without reference constraints the model is more sensible.
On the contrary, guided deconvolution tends to perform better when good quality references exist, also, this approach has better interpretability and the corresponding cell-types can be inferred directly from the reference matrix.
Its limitations include the dependence on reference quality and completeness and its weaker ability in detecting novel or altered cell states which are not present in the reference it was trained on.
